Indigenous Maps in Peter Fidler’s Notebooks

Peter Fidler had a compulsion to survey and map as much of the North American continent as he was able. His dedication to taking celestial observations at every opportunity, despite the obvious handicap that such activity placed upon the manic pace of travel that characterized the fur-trade brigades, to sketching and taking precise courses using compass and distance estimations, and the insatiable curiosity that led him to obtain geographical intelligence and copy out all travel narratives that he came across from his fellow traders, demonstrates a singular focus on elaborating a total geographic understanding of the land. 

Fidler employed native guides at every opportunity and records his apprehension of disaster on the few occasions when he is unable to find someone who knows the route, even when he has the notes of European surveyors such as Philip Turnor. His guides often begin to second-guess their knowledge once well into the journey; sometimes because they no longer wish to accompany the traders, but often enough their reticence is proved genuine when they lose the track and have to spend hours or even days back-tracking until they regain the proper track or find some other natives who can set them on the correct path. 

Though Fidler is fully aware of the superiority of the indigenous ways of understanding geography for the purpose of wilderness travel, he is after a different sort of knowledge; one that transforms individual memories into cartographic representations of the land as a whole. Where planning can be done remotely for collective projects that move trade goods over vast distances to match the schedules imposed by ocean-spanning trade in the age of sail. To this end he takes meticulous measurements of his path of travel, places those courses on the idealized globe of longitude and latitude, and sketches out miniature maps of the visual environment that he passes through. 

The traveller who aims to reach a certain place (e.g. Lake Athabasca) in the quickest and safest manner sees only a narrow window of geography on either side of the transportation corridor. Although Fidler could not hope to visit the regions between these corridors, he could impute the nature of the land by the size and flow of the rivers that merged into those that he was travelling upon. By questioning his native guides, he could get a broad understanding of the hydrographic basins that drained into those rivers that formed the transportation network. 

Even more valuable to the project of mapping the continent was native knowledge of those regions where Europeans had yet to venture. Peter Fidler’s travels along the Eastern slope of the Rockies in 1792-3 and his establishment of Chesterfield House at the junction of the Bow and Red Deer Rivers took him well into uncharted lands but also put him on the edge of a vast unknown wilderness. The Southern portion of the Great Plains and the land West of the Rockies, South of Alexander Mackenzie’s route to Bella Coola, were entirely unknown to Europeans. While at Chesterfield House, Fidler obtained maps of the Southern plains from some Blackfoot and Gros Ventres individuals that gave an overview of the hydrography and landmarks of this unknown region. Sometime later, Fidler also obtained (somewhat mysteriously) a map showing the West side of the Rockies drawn by a Métis known as Jaco Finlay. These maps were used to great effect by Aaron Arrowsmith to fill in his evolving map of North America.

Beyond this Eurocentric concern with the cartographic project, these maps are quite remarkable documents attesting to the vast regions that were regularly traversed by the nomadic tribes of the plains as well as the way they represented this knowledge. Other than pictographs, there is no written history left by these peoples thus archaeologists are left to make inferences from those artifacts that remain long enough to be found and the oral traditions which serve the people who create them and are not always reliable guides to Western notions of historiography. To have these contemporaneous records of native cartography preserved in ink on paper is a rare chance to gain insight to these societies with little room for pre-existing prejudices to shape a narrative that may reveal more about the creator of the narrative than its subject.  A recent book, Cartographic Poetry: Examining Historic Blackfoot and Gros Ventre Maps by Ted Binnema, François Lanoë, and Heinz W. Pyszczyk, explores this topic in detail and will be appreciated by anyone who is interested in the topic. Here I show two of these maps, by Ak Ko Mock Kee and by Kee Oo Cus as they appear in Volume 2 of Fidler’s notebooks.  I also show a copy of these maps with the rivers traced by highlighter and a contemporary map with the same rivers being highlighted to show the vast territory covered by these maps. 

I also include 3 similarly styled renderings of the curious map drawn by Jaco Finlay that is included in Volume 4 of Fidler’s notebooks. The curious part is how Fidler came into possession of the map so that he could make a copy of it. 

Jacques (Jaco, Jacko, Jocko) Finlay was a Métis who worked for the North West Company and operated a trading house on the Kootenay Plains, a prairie enclosed by the mountains along the upper North Saskatchewan river. Although no records survive for this post, Jaco and others (probably Freemen and Iroquois from Quebec) must have been resident on the Kootenay Plains for several years in the first decade of the 1800s as David Thompson complains that they have denuded the area of game when he travels through the area in 1807. 

Thompson, who was operating Rocky Mountain House at the time, engaged Jaco to accompany some Kootenay Indians over what we call Howse Pass to the large river on the Western side of the Rockies and to widen the track and build canoes for bringing trade goods across the following year (this was in 1806). Jaco came back to Rocky Mnt. House in November 1806 and did not accompany Thompson when he went West in 1807, returning in 1808. After a quick trip to Rainy River and back, Thompson returns to Kootenay House in October of 1808 and is back at Rocky Mnt. House in June 1809. In the spring of 1808, Jaco leaves Edmonton House with 5 Iroquois who have come from Michilimackinac travelling up river and they reach Kootenay House in November of 1808. Jaco does not return to the Eastern side of the Rockies again. Peter Fidler does not travel West of Cumberland House during this period so he could not have met with Jaco after Finlay had received information from Thompson’s first trip to Kootenay House in 1807-8 (the map includes information on the location of Kootenay House that can only come after the house has been built). 

James Bird and Joseph Howse (both with the HBC) were at Edmonton House when Jaco set out West with the 5 Iroquois. Bird, who was in charge of Edmonton House, wrote about this event to the governor at Churchill. Howse was at the time planning to follow Thompson to the Kootenay district and thus had a strong interest in finding out all he could about the country. They both met Fidler at the White Fall on the way to York Factory on June 13, 1808, so the most likely scenario is that Howse and/or Bird asked Jaco about the Kootenay district and he drew the map that Fidler then copied out when the three of them met on their way to Hudson’s Bay. 

The map is clearly drawn by someone who has actual knowledge of the pass through to the Columbia river (e.g. the diversion up Shunda creek is shown, exact distances are given, etc.) but some of the other information is closer to native cartography than European (e.g. consistency with compass bearings is not maintained). Kootenay House is labelled, “Mr. Thompson’s House” and is clearly not located by someone who has been to the location (it’s on the East shore of Columbia Lake rather than West side of Windermere). The portage to the Kootenay River is shown but then the river flows West rather than South. 

One of the most interesting features of the map is a dotted line that represents a trip made by 2 Iroquois Indians and sketched by them. This track follows the Brazeau river (marked at “North Branch Saskatchewan” which is odd since “North Branch” and “South Branch” were also used at the fork East of present day Prince Albert, SK) and then crosses either Nigel Pass or goes East of Mt. Sunwapta and across the divide to Fortress Lake. Then down the Wood river to Boat Encampment and up the Canoe river to the Tête Jaune Cache area. At the junction of the Columbia and Canoe rivers, there are 3 tents drawn and the annotation says, “3 tents of snare Indians. Slept with them 7 nights”. Presumably this is in the voice of the Iroquois who are “sketching” this dotted line. The Snare Indians are probably Xexka'llt Shuswap who were pushed North when the Kootenay were driven West over the mountains in the early 1700s by the Blackfoot. They mixed with Iroquois and Metis and are distinct from the Snake (Sekani Dene) who came to the same are from the North. (Arrowsmith’s map of 1811 shows Snare Indians at Tete Jaune Cache (as well as the Yellowhead, Athabasca, and Howse passes in their correct locations; information that could only come from Jaco’s map). 

While at the Kootenay Plains prior to 1806, Jaco Finlay would have had frequent dealings with Iroquois free traders who had been brought West to trap beaver (since the Plains Indians were largely self-sufficient and not motivated to accumulate beaver pelts to acquire trade goods). Between infrequent direct contact between Jaco and Kootenay Indians, and the more frequent indirect contact made by these free traders, Jaco would have built up a picture of the geography on the West side of the Rockies before he went there himself. Much of this map may represent this picture that he had developed. It is interesting to note that he has a pretty good understanding of the watershed South of the headwaters of the Columbia (but in a native context, not European) while he is entirely ignorant of the connection between the Columbia that he knows at the Blaeberry river and the big bend at Boat Encampment. This lacunae of knowledge is probably due to the recent movements of interior tribes into unfamiliar territory as they were pushed by the Westward expansion of the Blackfoot who were the first to combine guns and horses thereby becoming the most powerful force on the Western Plains. 

One final point to notice is the region of the map enclosed in dashed lines on the colorized version. This is an unrelated inset showing an area in the far North. It may be placed here to save on paper or for some other reason of which we know nothing.
