Volume 5 contains alternative versions of journals contained in Volume 3. The Vol 5 versions contain no maps but the courses are clearly taken from sketch maps as there is no consolidation of successive courses along the same direction (e.g. the sequence "NW 1/2 - NW 1/2 - NW 1" is not compressed to "NW 2"). Perhaps this is just because the courses are expressed as going from point to point, as a person in a canoe would experience it, but it does show that these recastings were not meant to discard the maps to create a more compressed version of the route description. As well, all the daily occurences that are irrelevant to route finding are included. However, when we compare some of these details, the minor differences indicate that Fidler created both versions from an independent source document (a rough, field copy perhaps). For example, on July 23, 1807 on the trip back from Athabasca Lake, in Vol 3 Fidler writes, "Delivered to Mr Sutherland the 2 large Bundles of Furrs we carried down from the Deers Lake" while in Vol 5 he writes, "Delivered to the Master here the 2 Large Bundles of Furrs we brought from the Deers Lake House". Small differences like these show that he may have begun Vol 5 because he had misplaced Vol 3 or loaned it out and began worrying for its return. The maps would have been priceless to him, but he may not have had the time to recreate them. I include them here for completeness, but the reason for their existence must remain mysterious. The kml files for these trips can be found in the Vol 3 folder.

1. Journal - Cumberland House to Athepescow to Fort Prince of Wales - 1807
2. 02 Journal - Charlton House to top of Lake Winnipeg - 1808
